I should've just got it all organized.
Good morning, Elspeth. Very nice to have you here with the Health Committee.
Morning.
We have you here to speak to your petition,
to launch a public inquiry into systemic harm to people with
ADHD.
I'm Sam Effendie, the chair of the committee.
We have members around the table here.
You won't be able to see them yet, but you will as and when they ask questions.
But welcome to the Health Committee. We have you here for 10 minutes.
You can use that time as you so wish.
If you want to leave us time for questions, you may.
I will hand that time to you now. Thank you.
Tena koutou katoa. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
This petition exists because the same patterns keep appearing.
Patterns of exclusion, patterns of misunderstanding, patterns of preventable
harm,
and because systemic harm experienced by people with ADHD is
real.
There are approximately 280,000 people with ADHD in
Aotearoa. That is enough people to fill the House of Representatives more than
2,200 times over. There are more of us than the population of
Wellington City, and yet, for a very long time, many of us have been
invisible. Invisible in schools, workplaces, policy.
Invisible in statistics, funding decisions, service design.
Invisible even when where the harm is most visible.
Invisible until
we start asking why the same patterns keep repeating,
and that is the question before this committee today.
Why do the same patterns keep repeating?
Why are children with ADHD
more likely to be excluded from school?
Why are women with ADHD significantly more likely to attempt suicide?
Why are people with ADHD over-represented in prisons?
Why are people with ADHD more likely to experience addiction,
unemployment, homelessness, burnout, relationship breakdown, and
mental health challenges?
At what point do we stop treating these as isolated
observations and start investigating the pattern?
Because these are not random outcomes, they are recurring outcomes.
I believe part of the answer lies in how ADHD has been understood
or, perhaps more accurately, misunderstood.
For decades, ADHD entered public awareness through behavior.
The behavior was visible, the brain difference was not.
And when something enters public awareness through behavior management,
it becomes much harder to reframe later.
So ADHD continues to be interpreted as behavior first, neurology second.
Many ADHD behaviors can look voluntary.
If someone interrupts, it can be mistaken for rudeness.
If someone struggles with organization, it can be mistaken for laziness.
If someone asks for accommodations, it can be mistaken for incompetence.
So we judge the person before we examine the environment.
We ask for compliance before we offer understanding.
Many assume that people with ADHD need to take more responsibility.
My experience has been the opposite.
Many people with ADHD have spent their entire lives taking responsibility, working
harder, compensating, staying late, blaming themselves.
Many of the harms associated with ADHD are not caused by people refusing
responsibility. They are caused by people carrying responsibility
alone. Parents attend meetings, fight for services, drive to
appointments, restructure careers,
and reorganize family life.
Some remove children from school because the environment becomes untenable, not
because they want to, because they feel they have no choice.
Those decisions come with costs. Lost income and career progression,
lost retirement savings, lost opportunities.
Parents quietly disappearing from the workforce while trying to keep
afloat. These are not lifestyle choices. These are adaptations.
Many people with ADHD exist in a strange gap, functioning enough to be
overlooked, struggling enough to be harmed.
People with ADHD have repeatedly demonstrated a willingness to do the work.
The challenge is whether the systems are willing to meet them halfway.
Because most people with ADHD are not asking for extraordinary lives.
They are trying to participate in ordinary life, and yet for many people, even
ordinary life comes at an extraordinary cost.
Behind those patterns are people.
A diagnosed 12-year-old crying on a bathroom floor saying he did not want to live.
An eight-year-old given a scripted apology at assembly for behaviors
related to her ADHD. A high-performing employee placed
on a performance improvement plan for communicating differently.
A parent seeking support for their child, only to be told that ADHD did not meet
the criteria for assistance.
An elderly New Zealander whose lifelong ADHD was never recognized, leaving
decades of struggle unexplained.
Could this have gone differently?
These are not isolated stories. These are evidence.
There is also intergenerational
harm. Many adults discover ADHD only after their children are
diagnosed. They look backwards at parents, grandparents,
siblings. If we do not act, future generations will carry it, too.
ADHD is not an excuse, but it is a reason,
and the reason needs to be listened to.
Government cannot solve every challenge, but government can change the conditions
in which people live. Government can coordinate, measure, and plan.
The OIA analysis that informed my written submission exists because when
harm is systemic, we need to understand the system itself.
ADHD affects a large number of New Zealanders. The human cost is significant.
The evidence also points to an opportunity.
An opportunity to reduce preventable harm, improve participation,
unlock potential, and enable hundreds of thousands of people to contribute more
fully to their families, communities, workplaces, and society.
ADHD does not sit neatly within one system.
It touches health, education, employment, justice, disability,
housing, families, communities.
Yet ADHD is still often viewed primarily through a health lens.
Health matters, assessment matters, treatment options matter, but ADHD does not
begin and end in the health system.
Many of the harms people describe occur in classrooms, workplaces, disability
systems, family courts, and communities.
The A diagnosis may help explain a person's experience, but it does
not redesign a classroom, a workplace, or a support system.
If our response to ADHD remains centered primarily on health, we
risk overlooking many of the places where harm occurs and many of the
opportunities for improvement. An inquiry provides a mechanism to bring
those pieces together, to hear directly from people with ADHD and their
families, alongside clinicians, researchers, educators,
employers, and communities. It provides an opportunity to
understand where harm is occurring, why it is occurring, and what is falling
through the gaps. Because if the patterns cross systems, the investigation must
cross systems, too. If the harm is systemic, the response must be systemic.
And if we're serious about reducing that harm, we must be willing to
examine it properly.
What emerged from the OA responses is not necessarily a lack of goodwill.
It was fragmentation.
We need a coordinated approach that survives personnel
changes, funding decisions, and changes of government.
This inquiry is not being requested because nobody has tried.
People have been trying for years.
Families have been advocating, researchers have been publishing evidence,
clinicians have been raising concerns.
Community organizations and volunteers have been filling gaps.
People with ADHD have been telling their stories.
The question is not whether
enough people have spoken. The question is whether we are finally prepared to
listen. Because without a mechanism to bring these experiences, evidence, and
perspectives together, the same patterns will continue to repeat.
People do well as they can. Our system should make that possible.
If we continue treating ADHD as a behavior problem, we will
keep focusing on compliance rather than understanding.
But if we recognize ADHD as a neurodevelopmental difference, we can start
replacing shame with understanding, judgment with support, exclusion with
belonging, and invisibility with recognition.
The harm is not invisible. What has been invisible is our willingness to see
it, and inquiry is how we change the pattern.
Thank you.
Thank you, Elspeth. A very good submission.
I've got a question to my left from Ash Vero.
Yeah. Thank you very much, Elspeth.
What a considerable amount of work you've done in data
gathering and synthesis for your submission, which is really well put together.
This committee has had the experience of doing one
inquiry in this parliament in a bipartisan way
on dementia. And
you've identified such a big issue, and
you're right to point out it's complex and across
agencies.
Could you help us
understand
what the key thing you would want out of an inquiry?
Because we would have to focus our efforts to
be able to achieve something meaningful
through an inquiry. So what would be the key
area that you'd like focus on? And I do wonder,
is it data? Because your submission focuses a lot on
gaps in data.
There's 280,000
estimated people with ADHD in New Zealand, so the inquiry
itself would be the form to gather
stories and evidence from people across New Zealand.
I don't really feel like I'm in a position personally to
say what we would want out of an inquiry on behalf
of that community.
If it's possible,
I find that my written communication is often clearer and more complete than my
spoken communication, so after this, I will be thinking on the question that you've
asked me, and will probably have a more coherent answer later.
Because
the actual mechanism asking for the inquiry was the point,
because what I want is different from what someone else would
want.
So yeah, I wasn't expecting that question, but I
do appreciate it. It is a good one.
It's a very human response to a question. We all get it.
Very much. Excellent. Thank you, Elspeth.
It is a very informative submission.
I have two questions.
I appreciate-
Big on time. No, okay, appreciate, Graham. Not big on time.
I appreciate you saying that this is spread over a lot of agencies.
Do you have any particular area or particular agency that you think
should lead this work? And secondly,
do you think a
more timely diagnosis or actually a clearer
diagnosis pathway would actually solve a lot of the problems that you've
identified?
I'm not a clinician, nor am I actually affiliated with any
organization, and that was part of the
reason why I did this. I'm completely independent.
But as you know, there was over 1,800 people have signed this.
So I would not personally delegate a particular organization.
Sorry. I was
meaning government agency, whether it be education-
Oh, okay. Sorry.
Sorry, yeah.
Totally misunderstood the question there.
I don't know. Because I looked at the
different committees that you have, and I still thought we could sit
in the governance one, we could sit in education.
We could obviously sit in health. Actually, this is part of the problem.
I couldn't figure out where it would go.
We tend to often be referred to health, right?
So I wasn't-
Which is completely fine.
Yeah.
So how much of these issues do you think would be
solved with more timely diagnosis or a clearer path,
bearing in mind we are dealing with something which is
a broad spectrum with probably fuzzy
edges?
I honestly think environment matters so much.
So
not everyone can access
the pathway to get a diagnosis.
And whilst that advocacy is very important, I think the likes of
changes in a workplace and a classroom, those fit outside
the health system.
And I think...
Sorry, I'm really struggling to find my words.
Yeah.
So
I can obviously see the benefit of that, but I think that's only part of the
picture.
Thank you. We're a couple of minutes over
time. I'm sorry, Jenny.
Okay.
Elspeth, thank you very much. I think Dr.
Vero and Hamish summed it up very well.
Very well put together petition and submission to the committee.
Thank you for-
Right
... making yourself available this morning. Thank you.
Thank you. Bye.
Bye.
All right, we'll move back into private, please.